=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

blip.bash - Bash Library for Indolent Programmers

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 #!/bin/bash
 
 set -euo pipefail
 source /usr/lib/blip.bash
 
 main () {
     local name="$(get_gecos_name)"
     if get_user_confirmation "Is your name ${name:-(unknown)}?" ; then
         echo "Nice to meet you ${name:-mystery user}."
     else
         echo "I'll just call you $(get_username) then."
     fi
 }
 
 main "$@"

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<blip> is a Bash Library for Indolent (lazy) Programmers. It is a bash script that
is intended to be sourced in as a library of common functions to aid development
of shell scripts.

This project is still in the early stages of development and is expected to
change. However, with the mantra release early, release often, in mind, it
is available in this early state to help solicit feedback and user input.

Please feel free to contact the author or offer patches to the source.

=head1 FUNCTIONS

=head2 abs ()

=head2 absolute ()

Alias for C<abs ()>.

=head2 is_mac_address ()

=head2 is_eui48_address ()

=head2 is_eui64_address ()

=head2 read_config_file ()

=head2 trim ()

=head2 is_newer_version ()

=head2 required_command_version ()

=head2 append_trap "$ACTION" "$SIGNALn" ...

=head2 execute_trap_stack "$SIGNAL"

=head2 get_trap_stack "$SIGNALn" ...

=head2 pop_trap_stack "$SIGNALn" ...

=head2 push_trap_stack "$ACTION" "$SIGNALn" ...

=head2 set_trap_stack "$ACTION" "$SIGNALn" ...

=head2 unset_trap_stack "$SIGNALn" ...

=head2 append_if_not_present ()

=head2 get_pid_lock_filename "$LOCK_DIR" "$PID_FILENAME"

=head2 get_exclusive_execution_lock ()

=head2 get_date ()

=head2 get_file_age "$FILE"

=head2 get_free_disk_space "$FILESYSTEM"

=head2 get_fs_mounts ()

=head2 get_gecos_info ()

=head2 get_gecos_name ()

=head2 get_user_shell ()

=head2 get_max_length ()

=head2 get_string_characters ()

=head2 get_unixtime ()

=head2 get_user_confirmation ()

See also: C<select> bash built-in.

=head2 get_username ()

=head2 get_user_selection ()

See also: C<select> bash built-in.

=head2 as_json_string ()

=head2 as_json_value ()

=head2 get_variable_type ()

=head2 vars_as_json ()

=head2 is_abs_int ()

=head2 is_absolute_integer ()

Alias for C<is_abs_int ()>.

=head2 is_boolean ()

=head2 is_false "$ARG1"

Return C<0> I<true> if C<$ARG1> may be considered boolean false by a
human. Values to be considered true include: C<0>, C<false>, C<no>, C<off>,
C<disable> and C<disabled>.

=head2 is_in_path "$CMDn" ...

=head2 is_float "$ARG1"

Return C<0> I<true> if C<$ARG1> is a floating-point value.

=head2 is_int "$ARG1"

Return C<0> I<true> if C<$ARG1> is an integer value.

=head2 is_integer "$ARG1"

Alias for C<is_int ()>.

=head2 is_zero "$ARG1"

=head2 is_negative "$ARG1"

=head2 is_positive "$ARG1"

=head2 is_true "$ARG1"

Return C<0> I<true> if C<$ARG1> may be considered boolean true by a
human. Values to be considered true include: C<1>, C<true>, C<yes>, C<on>,
C<enable> and C<enabled>.

=head2 is_word_in_string "$STR1" "$WORD1"

=head2 to_lower "$ARGn" ...

=head2 to_upper "$ARGn" ...

=head2 url_exists "$URL"

Return C<0> I<(true)> if C<$URL> exists, as determined by a 2XX HTTP response
code. Otherwise returns C<1> I<(false)>.
Requires the C<curl> command to be present in the shell search path.

=head2 url_http_header "$URL"

Outputs (echos to C<STDOUT>) the full HTTP response headers returned by the remote
web server for C<$URL>.
Requires the C<curl> command to be present in the shell search path.

=head2 url_http_response "$URL"

Outputs (echos to C<STDOUT>) the HTTP response code (including textual 
description) returned by the remote web server for C<$URL>. Follows HTTP
redirects using C<curl>'s C<-L> flag, returning only the last HTTP response
code.

Requires the C<curl> command to be present in the shell search path.

=head2 url_http_response_code "$URL"

Similar to C<url_http_response>, except the textual description is omitted,
outputting only the numerical value.

=head2 cmdarg_info "$TYPE" "$ARGn" ...

See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head2 cmdarg "$FLAG" "$LONGOPT" "$DEFALT" "$VALIDATOR"

See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head2 cmdarg_parse "$@"

See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head2 cmdarg_usage ()

See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head2 cmdarg_describe "$FLAG"

See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head2 cmdarg_purge ()

See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head2 cmdarg_check_empty "$FLAG"

Used internally by command line argument parsing (C<cmdarg_parse()> function),
not usually expected to be used directly. See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head2 cmdarg_describe_default ...

Used internally by command line argument parsing (C<cmdarg_describe()>
function), not usually expected to be used directly. See
L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head2 cmdarg_set_opt "$LONGOPT" "$VALUE"

Used internally by command line argument parsing (C<cmdarg_parse()> function),
not usually expected to be used directly. See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head2 cmdarg_validate ...

Used internally by command line argument parsing (C<cmdarg_set_opt()> function),
not usually expected to be used directly. See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head1 COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING

See also L<CMDARG.md>
(L<https://github.com/neechbear/blip/blob/master/CMDARG.md>).

=head1 VARIABLES

=head2 BLIP_VERSION

Contains the version of B<blip> as a string value.

Example: C<0.01-3-prerelease>

=head2 BLIP_VERSINFO

A 4-element array containing version information about the version of B<blip>.

Example:

 BLIP_VERSINFO[0] = 0          # Major version number
 BLIP_VERSINFO[1] = 01         # Minor version number
 BLIP_VERSINFO[2] = 3          # Patch / release number
 BLIP_VERSINFO[3] = prerelease # Release status

=head2 BLIP_START_UNIXTIME

=head2 BLIP_TRAP_MAP

=head2 BLIP_TRAP_STACK

=head2 ANSI, & ANSI_*

These variables contain common ANSI terminal colour codes.

A list of all keys within the C<ANSI> associative array may be obtained
through the following code example:

 BLIP_ANSI_VARIABLES=1
 source /usr/lib/blip.bash
 echo "${!ANSI[@]}"

See also L<#BLIP_ANSI_VARIABLES> in the L<#ENVIRONMENT> section below.

=head2 cmdarg_cfg

See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head2 cmdarg_argv

See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head2 cmdarg_helpers

See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head2 CMDARG, CMDARG_*

The following variables are used internally by the command line argument
parsing: C<CMDARG>, C<CMDARG_REV>, C<CMDARG_OPTIONAL>, C<CMDARG_REQUIRED>,
C<CMDARG_DESC>, C<CMDARG_DEFAULT>, C<CMDARG_VALIDATORS>, C<CMDARG_INFO>,
C<CMDARG_FLAGS>, C<CMDARG_TYPES>.

These variables are not intended to be read or modified directly.

See L<#COMMAND LINE ARGUMENT PARSING>.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=head2 BLIP_DEBUG_LOGLEVEL

=head2 BLIP_ALLOW_FOREIGN_SHELLS

When set to C<1>, inhibits C<exit> functionality to abort operation
when B<blip> determines that it is not running inside a bash shell interpreter.

See also L<#BLIP_INTERNAL_FATAL_ACTION>.

=head2 BLIP_INTERNAL_FATAL_ACTION

Specifies the command to execute when C<blip> encounters a fatal internal
condition such as being called by an incompatible foreign shell, or not meeting
the minimum version requirements set by the C<BLIP_REQUIRE_VERSION> variable.

Defaults to C<exit 2>.

See also: L<#BLIP_REQUIRE_VERSION>.

=head2 BLIP_REQUIRE_VERSION

Specifies the minimum version of B<blip> required by the calling parent script.
B<blip> will C<exit> with a non-zero (C<2>) return code if the
C<${BLIP_VERSINFO[@]}> array does not indicate a version that is equal to
or greater.

Example:

 BLIP_REQUIRE_VERSION="0.02-13"
 source /usr/lib/blip.bash

=head2 BLIP_ANSI_VARIABLES

When set to C<1>, causes B<blip> to declare read-only variables containing
common ANSI terminal colour codes. All declared variable names being with
the prefix C<ANSI_>, with the excption of one associative array which is
simply C<ANSI>.

A list of all declared ANSI variables may be obtained through the following
code example:

 BLIP_ANSI_VARIABLES=1
 source /usr/lib/blip.bash
 compgen -A variable | grep ANSI

See also: L<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ANSI_escape_code>.

=head2 BLIP_EXTERNAL_CMD_FLOCK

Specifies an explicit command path when executing the external dependency
command C<flock>. Defaults to C<flock> without an explicit path in order to
search C<$PATH>.

=head2 BLIP_EXTERNAL_CMD_STAT

Specifies an explicit command path when executing the external dependency
command C<stat>. Defaults to C<stat> without an explicit path in order to
search C<$PATH>.

=head2 BLIP_EXTERNAL_CMD_BC

Specifies an explicit command path when executing the external dependency
command C<bc>. Defaults to C<bc> without an explicit path in order to
search C<$PATH>.

=head2 BLIP_EXTERNAL_CMD_CURL

Specifies an explicit command path when executing the external dependency
command C<curl>. Defaults to C<curl> without an explicit path in order to
search C<$PATH>.

=head2 BLIP_EXTERNAL_CMD_DATE

Specifies an explicit command path when executing the external dependency
command C<date>. Defaults to C<date> without an explicit path in order to
search C<$PATH>.

=head2 BLIP_EXTERNAL_CMD_GREP

Specifies an explicit command path when executing the external dependency
command C<grep>. Defaults to C<grep> without an explicit path in order to
search C<$PATH>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Nicola Worthington <nicola@tfb.net>.

=head1 URLS

L<https://nicolaw.uk/blip>, L<https://github.com/neechbear/blip/>

=head1 SEE ALSO

/usr/share/doc/blip, bash(1).

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2016,2017 Nicola Worthington <nicolaw@tfb.net>.
With contributions from Sergej Alikov, 2016.

Command line argument parsing functionality is adapted from the C<cmdarg.sh>
library (L<https://github.com/akesterson/cmdarg>), which is written by and
Copyright (c) 2013 Andrew Kesterson <andrew@aklabs.net>.

This software is released under the MIT License.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.

